>> Woodruff: OIL GIANT BRITISH
PETROLEUM SETTLES TO PAY NEARLY
$19 BILLION IN DAMAGES CAUSED BY
THE DEEPWATER HORIZON SPILL.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY:
LOVE AND MARRIAGE, WEDDING
ENTREPRENEURS PREPARE FOR A BOOM
IN BUSINESS NOW THAT SAME-SEX
UNIONS ARE LEGAL NATIONWIDE.
>> THEY DON'T HAVE TO GO OUT OF
STATE AND MARRY.
A LOT OF OUR CUSTOMERS WERE
GOING TO NEW YORK OR
MASSACHUSETTS TO GET MARRIED SO
NOW THEY CAN DO IT HERE.
>> Woodruff: THEN, SURVIVING THE
NEXT BIG STORM.
THE TALE OF TWO VULNERABLE
CITIES AND URGENT EFFORTS TO
PREPARE FOR RISING SEA LEVELS
AND SEVERE FLOODING.
>> A STORM COMES IN, WE HAVE A
DAMAGING FLOOD, AND WE SAY WE
HAD A STORM, WE HAD A FLOOD, BUT
EVERY FLOOD IS DEEPER, BIGGER,
AND MORE DAMAGING BECAUSE OF THE
SEA LEVEL RISE WE'VE ALREADY
HAD.
>> Woodruff: AND...
>> THIS IS WHAT THE COSMOS
SOUNDS LIKE.
>> Woodruff: WHEN MEDICINE AND
MUSIC COLLIDE.
GRATEFUL DEAD DRUMMER MICKEY
HART EXPLORES THE SCIENTIFIC
POWER OF "GOOD VIBRATIONS."
>> MICKEY'S WEARING AN E.E.G.
CAP AND EACH OF THESE ELECTRODES
ARE DETECTING THE SUBTLE SIGNALS
OF RHYTHMIC ACTIVITY BEING
GENERATED BY THE NEURONS IF HIS
BRAIN.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE ME OSOF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE LATEST LOOK AT
THE JOB MARKET SHOWS PROGRESS IS
STILL COMING IN FITS AND STARTS.
THE LABOR DEPARTMENT TODAY
REPORTED A NET GAIN OF 223,000
JOBS FOR JUNE.
IN TURN, THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
FELL TO 5.3%, THE LOWEST IN
7 YEARS.
THAT WAS LARGELY BECAUSE SO MANY
PEOPLE GAVE UP TRYING.
THE PROPORTION OF AMERICANS
WORKING OR LOOKING FOR WORK IS
NOW THE SMALLEST IN 38 YEARS.
WE'LL FOCUS ON WHY THAT'S THE
CASE, LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
WALL STREET WAS UNIMPRESSED BY
THE JOBS REPORT.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 28 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,730.
THE NASDAQ FELL FOUR POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED A
FRACTION OF A POINT.
THERE WAS NO BREAK TODAY IN THE
FINANCIAL DRAMA GRIPPING GREECE.
LINES REMAINED LONG AS
PENSIONERS TRIED TO GET FUNDS
FROM DESIGNATED BANKS.
THE FINANCE MINISTER SAID THE
CASH CRUNCH SHOWS THE NEED TO
VOTE AGAINST AUSTERITY IN
SUNDAY'S REFERENDUM.
SUNDAY'S REFERENDUM. >> (
translated): THE GREEK
>> (translated): THE
GREEK PEOPLE WILL VOTE NO.
PEOPLE WILL VOTE NO.
WE WANT YOU TO GIVE US SOME
CLARIFICATION THAT IT IS NOT
DIGNIFIED TO STAND IN LINES AT
A.T.M.'S.
SOMETHING I PERSONALLY DIDN'T
LIKE WAS THAT FROM DAY ONE, THE
ATM IN PARLIAMENT RAN OUT OF
CASH FOUR TIMES.
I DIDN'T LIKE THAT AND I AM NOT
TAKING PART IN THAT.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, THE
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
BLAMED GREECE FOR BEING TOO SLOW
TO ENACT ECONOMIC REFORMS.
IT SAID GREECE NEEDS DEBT RELIEF
AND $56 BILLION IN NEW
FINANCING.
NIGERIA WAS RAVAGED TODAY BY A
NEW ATROCITY.
GOVERNMENT AND MILITARY
OFFICIALS SAY BOKO HARAM
EXTREMISTS NNEDGU DOWN NEARLY A
HUNDRED MUSLIMS AT SEVERAL
MOSQUES.
IT HAPPENED IN THE TOWN OF
KUKAWA, DURING PRAYERS THAT WERE
PART OF THE HOLY MONTH OF
RAMADAN.
MEANWHILE, EGYPT'S MILITARY
STRUCK BACK AGAINST ISLAMIC
STATE ELEMENTS IN THE SINAI
PENINSULA.
SECURITY OFFICIALS SAID DAWN AIR
STRIKES KILLED 23 MILITANTS.
IT CAME A DAY AFTER THEY
ASSAULTED ARMY CHECKPOINTS.
THE ARMY SAID 17 SOLDIERS DIED
IN THOSE ATTACKS, BUT OTHER
REPORTS SAID DOZENS WERE KILLED.
AN APPEALS COURT IN AFGHANISTAN
HAS OVERTURNED THE DEATH
SENTENCES OF FOUR MEN IN THE MOB
KILLING OF A WOMAN.
INSTEAD, THEY'LL EACH SERVE 10
TO 20 YEARS IN PRISON.
THE VICTIM, FARKHUNDA MALIKZADA,
WAS FALSELY ACCUSED OF BURNING A
KORAN.
HER FAMILY DEMANDED JUSTICE
AFTER SHE WAS BEATEN TO DEATH
AND THEN SET ON FIRE
LAST MARCH, IN KABUL.
AND, THEY WERE OUTRAGED BY THE
COURT'S RULING
COURT'S RULING >> (
translated): WE DON'T
>> (translated): WE
DON'T ACCEPT THE DECISION OF THE
ACCEPT THE DECISION OF THE 20
YEAR SENTENCE, IT DOESN'T MEAN
ANYTHING, IT IS POINTLESS.
A 20 YEAR SENTENCE ULTIMATELY
MEANS THAT THE KILLERS WILL BE
RELEASED.
WE WANT THE PREVIOUS DECISION OF
THE DEATH PENALTY AND WE
STRICTLY WANT THE DEATH PENALTY.
>> Woodruff: ACTIVISTS ACCUSE
THE COURT OF BOWING TO PRESSURE
FROM AFGHANISTAN'S CONSERVATIVE
RELIGIOUS ESTABLISHMENT.
AT LEAST 35 PEOPLE DROWNED TODAY
WHEN A FERRY CAPSIZED IN THE
CENTRAL PHILIPPINES.
20 OTHERS REMAIN MISSING.
THE WOODEN OUTRIGGER HIT STRONG
WAVES JUST AFTER LEAVING ORMOC
CITY AND ROLLED OVER.
MORE THAN 130 PEOPLE SWAM TO
SAFETY, OR WERE RESCUED BY
FISHING BOATS.
VICTIMS WERE RUSHED ASHORE AND
THEN, TO NEARBY HOSPITALS.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, A FREIGHT
TRAIN CARRYING A TOXIC CHEMICAL
DERAILED AND CAUGHT FIRE IN
MARYVILLE, TENNESSEE.
SEVERAL EMERGENCY WORKERS
WENT TO A HOSPITAL AFTER
BREATHING IN FUMES, AND THE
TRAIN BURNED THROUGH THE DAY.
FORMER VIRGINIA SENATOR JIM WEBB
HAS ENTERED THE DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENTIAL RACE.
HE ANNOUNCED TODAY ON HIS
CAMPAIGN WEBSITE, SAYING THE
COUNTRY "NEEDS A FRESH
APPROACH."
WEBB IS 69, AND A FORMER
SECRETARY OF THE NAVY AND
DECORATED VIETNAM VETERAN.
AND, THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH WILL
ALLOW SAME-SEX COUPLES TO HAVE
RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AT THEIR
WEDDINGS.
SOME EPISCOPALIAN PRIESTS WERE
ALREADY PERFORMING CIVIL
CEREMONIES.
THE NEW POLICY WON OVERWHELMING
APPROVAL LAST NIGHT AT THE
CHURCH'S NATIONAL MEETING.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN PAYMENTS
END A LEGAL FIGHT OVER DAMAGES
FROM THE DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL
SPILL.
INVESTIGATING TICKET PRICES AND
THE LACK OF COMPETITION IN THE
AIRLINE INDUSTRY.
UNEMPLOYMENT FALLS AS MORE
AMERICANS DEPART THE WORK FORCE.
AN ECONOMIC BOOM FOR WEDDING
ORGANIZERS AFTER SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE IS LEGALIZED
NATIONWIDE.
TWO CITIES PREPARE FOR RISING
SEA LEVELS AND FLOODING.
GRATEFUL DEAD DRUMMER MICKEY
HART'S COSMIC APPROACH TO MUSIC.
AND, A BRIEF, BUT SPECTACULAR
TAKE ON POLICING IN AFRICAN-
AMERICAN COMMUNITIES.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS THE NATION'S
WORST OIL DISASTER AND CAME TO
BE KNOWN AS THE "B.P. SPILL."
AFTER A LONG AND BITTER FIGHT
THAT PLAYED OUT IN THE COURTS, A
RECORD SETTLEMENT WAS FINALLY
ANNOUNCED TODAY.
THE OIL GUSHED FROM B.P.'S
MACONDO WELL FOR 87 DAYS.
NOW, ALMOST FIVE YEARS SINCE THE
WELL WAS SEALED, THE COMPANY
AIMS TO SETTLE WITH THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT AND FIVE STATES:
ALABAMA, FLORIDA,OUIS LIANA,
MISSISSIPPI AND TEXAS.
ALABAMA GOVERNOR ROBERT BENTLEY:
>> WITH THE AGREEMENT REACHED
TODAY AND THE COMPENSATION B.P.
WILL PAY FOR THEIR
RESPONSIBILITY, WE ARE TAKING A
SIGNIFICANT STEP FORWARD IN OUR
STATE AND ESPECIALLY IN THE GULF
COAST AREAS, TO MOVE FORWARD
WITH THE WORST ENVIRONMENTAL
DISASTER IN HISTORY.
>> Woodruff: IN ALL, 134 MILLION
GALLONS OF CRUDE FOULED THE
GULF'S WATERS, AND COATED
ACHBEES AND BARRIER ISLANDS,
KILLING THOUSANDS OF ANIMALS,
AND DECIMATING LOCAL FISHERIES.
THE PROJECTED DEAL TOTALS
$18.7 BILLION.
$5.5 BILLION WOULD GO TOWARD
RESTORATION EFFORTS, AS PART OF
A FEDERAL CLEAN WATER ACT
PENALTY.
ANOTHER $7 BILLION WOULD COVER
NATURAL RESOURCE DAMAGES.
AND NEARLY $6 BILLION GOES TO
ECONOMIC AND OTHER CLAIMS BY
FIVE STATES AND 400 LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ENTITIES.
IN A STATEMENT TODAY, U.S.
ATTORNEY GENERAL LORETTA LYNCH
CALLED IT THE LARGEST
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTLEMENT IN U.S.
HISTORY.
FOR B.P., THE SETTLEMENT WILL
EFFECTIVELY ADD ABOUT $10
BILLION TO THE
$44 BILLION IT ALREADY SET ASIDE
FOR CLEANUP COSTS AND PENALTIES.
THE OIL GIANT HAD REVENUES OF
$15 BILLION LAST YEAR, AND WILL
SPREAD THE SETTLEMENT'S COSTS
OVER THE NEXT 15 T0 18 YEARS.
IN A STATEMENT TODAY, B.P.'S
C.E.O. BOB DUDLEY SAID:
THE AGREEMENT IS STILL SUBJECT
TO FINAL APPROVAL BY A FEDERAL
JUDGE.
THE SETTLEMENT WAS HAILED BY A
NUMBER OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS, BUT
SEVERAL ENVIRONMENTAL GROUPS
CALLED THE FINAL AGREEMENT
DISAPPOINTING.
JOINING US IS A KEY FIGURE WHO
WAS INVOLVED IN HAMMERING OUT
THE DEAL.
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE GARRET
GRAVES SERVED AS LOUISIANA'S
LEAD TRUSTEE REPRESENTING THE
STATE IN THE B.P. OIL SPILL
NEGOTIATIONS FROM 2010-2014.
HE'S SERVED AS AN ADVISER SINCE.
HE IS A REPUBLICAN AND JOINS US
FROM BATON ROUGE.
CONDITIONINGMAN
CONGRESSMAN GAVES, WELCOME.
IS THIS A FAIR SETTLEMENT?
>> IT IS.
JUDY, I THINK IT'S VERY
IMPORTANT.
YOU CAN'T JUST LOOK AT THIS IN A
VACUUM.
YOU HAVE TO LOOK AT THE OTHER
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO SETTLE.
THIS WE'VE BEEN SITTING HERE FOR
FIVE YEARS WITH ONE OF THE
BIGGEST ENVIRONMENTAL CRISES IN
OUR NATION'S HISTORY AND WE
HAVEN'T HAD ANY TYPE OF
SETTLEMENT OR FINANCIAL
SETTLEMENT FOR THE GULF OF
MEXICO.
SO YOU ACCEPT THIS DEAL OR GET
STUCK IN A JUDICIAL PROCESS
WHERE WE COULD BE TALKING ABOUT
THIS FOR TEN OR 20 YEARS.
>> HOW WAS THE NUMBER $18.7
BILLION ARRIVED AT?
>> I CAN'T SPEAK FOR THE OTHER
STATES.
IN THE CASE OF LOUISIANA, THE
DECISION ON NUMBERS WAS BASED
ENTIRELY UPON SCIENCE, MEASURING
THE ECOLOGICAL DAMAGES, THE
NATURAL RESOURCE IMPACT TO OUR
COASTAL RESOURCES, TO THE GULF
OF MEXICO WHERE THE TOP FISHERY
STATE IN THE CONTINENTAL UNITED
STATES AND THE ECOLOGICAL
PRODUCTIVITY IS VERY IMPORTANT
TO OUR STATE'S ECONOMY AND OUR
CULTURE HERE.
>> Woodruff: HOW WILL
LOUISIANA USE ITS SHARE?
>> THE STATE HAS COMMITTED TO
USE ALL $5 BILLION OF NATURAL
RESOURCE DAMAGES TO ADVANCE OUR
OVERALL COASTAL MASTER PLAN,
INVESTING IN AND RESTORING THE
CHESTAL WETLANDS, INVESTING IN
PROJECTS THAT IMPROVE THE
PRODUCTION OF FISHERIES IN THE
GULF OF MEXICO TO MANAGE THE
FISHERIES, MAKING SEVERAL
INVESTMENTS IN BIRD PROJECTS, AS
WELL.
THIS IS THE LARGEST HABITAT FOR
MIGRATORY WATERFOWL.
SO WE'LL MAKE MAJOR INVESTMENTS
IN ECOLOGICAL REST FOR RATION.
THAT'S WHERE VIRTUALLY ALL OF
THE NATURAL RESOURCE DOLLARS ARE
BEING COMMITTED.
OF THE $8.1 BILLION IN NATURAL
RESOURCES RESTORATION, WELL OVER
$5 BILLION WILL BE SPENT IN THE
STATE OF LOUISIANA.
>> Woodruff: ARE YOU
COMFORTABLE WITH HOW THE OTHER
MONEY WILL BE SPENT?
FOR EXAMPLE, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT GETS $5 BILLION IN
PENALTIES THAT ARE RELATED TO
THE CLEAN WATER ACT?
>> UNDER FEDERAL LAW PASSED IN
THE SUMMER OF 2012, 80% OF THOSE
DOLLARS WILL BE ALLOCATED TO
WHAT'S KNOWN AS A RESTORE
COUNCIL.
IT'S A STATE AND FEDERAL COUNCIL
THAT WILL BE MAKING DECISIONS IN
THE ALLOCATIONS OF THOSE FUNDS.
I DON'T THINK IT'S THE MOST
EFFICIENT MECHANISM TO ALHE KATE
THE FUNDS, BUT IT IS SOMETHING
THAT WILL ENSURE PUBLIC
PARTICIPATION AND SOME
TRANSPARENCY IN THE DECISIONS.
>> I'M SURE YOU KNOW,
CONGRESSMAN GRAVES, THAT A
NUMBER OF ENVIRONMENTAL GROUPS
SAY THIS IS NOT NEARLY ENOUGH.
THEY ARE SAYING THE DAMAGE IS
EXTENSIVE.
IT WILL GO ON FOR YEARS, EVEN
DECADES.
AND B.P. SHOULD HAVE BEEN ASKED
TO PAY MUCH MORE.
>> LOOK, IF WE WERE IN A VACUUM,
IF YOU MADE ME KINGS OF THE DAY,
THERE CERTAINLY ARE SOME CHANGES
I WOULD MAKE TO THIS AGREEMENT.
IT'S IMPORTANT THE KEEP IN MIND
THAT, NUMBER ONE, YOU CAN'T GO
OUT THERE AND GO PUT TENS OF
BILLIONS ON THOSE COMPANIES.
THIS WOULD HAVE CRIPPLED OR
BANKRUPTED MOST COMPANIES AROUND
THE WORLD.
NUMBER TWO, WE HAVE SEEN A
DECLINE IN GAS PRICES, A DECLINE
IN PROFITS FOR THE COMPANY.
THOSE THINGS NEED TO BE TAKEN
INTO CONSIDERATION, AS WELL.
I THINK THIS WAS THE BEST DEAL
THAT WAS GOING TO BE CUT
COOPERATIVELY AND THERE WERE
SEVERAL PREVIOUS ATTEMPTS AT
NEGOTIATIONS THAT WERE REJECTED
BY THE STATE OF LOUISIANA
BECAUSE OF INSUFFICIENT FUNDS.
AGAIN, I COULD MAKE SOME
PRIVATES TO THIS IN A VACUUM,
BUT COMPARED TO THE OTHER
ALTERNATIVE, THIS IS A GOOD DEAL
AND THIS SETTLEMENT NEEDS TO BE
APPROVED.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU EXPECT THE
COURT WILL APPROVE THIS?
>> I THINK THEY WILL.
RIGHT NOW IT IS SIMPLY AN
AGREEMENT IN PRINCIPLE.
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE WAS
OBVIOUSLY VERY HEAVILY INVOLVED
IN NEGOTIATIONS.
IT'S GOING TO HAVE TO BE
TRANSLATED TO A CONCEPT DECREE
AND SUBMITTED TO THE COURTS
ULTIMATELY WHICH WILL TAKE
MONTHS, BUT I DO EXPECT THE
COURT TO APPROVE THIS SETTLEMENT
PROPOSAL.
>> EXCUSE ME, AND AS I
UNDERSTAND IT, THERE ARE STILL
SOME PRIVATE PIECES OF
LITIGATION THAT ARE OUT THERE,
INDIVIDUALS AND BUSINESSES WHO
HAVE SUED B.P. AND THOSE CASES
ARE STILL OUTSTANDING.
>> WITHOUT A DOUBT, THAT'S A
REALLY IMPORTANT POINT TO MAKE.
THERE ARE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN
PRIVATE CLAIMS THAT ARE STILL
OUTSTANDING.
THERE WAS A LARGE SETTLEMENT
THAT WAS REACHED WITH A MAJORITY
OF THE PLAINTIFFS IN THIS CASE,
BUT MANY OF THEM OPTED TO NOT GO
WITH THAT SETTLEMENT OFFER THAT
WAS OUT THERE.
SO THOSE CASES WILL CONTINUE
PROCEEDING THROUGH THE JUDICIAL
PROCESS.
THE SETTLEMENT THAT WAS
ANNOUNCED TODAY PERTAINS ONLY TO
FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENT CLAIMS AGAINST B.P.
>> ALL RIGHT.
U.S. REPRESENTATIVE GARRETT
GRAVES OF LOUISIANA, WE THANK
YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IS INVESTIGATING
WHETHER THE MAJOR AIRLINES HAVE
COLLUDED TO KEEP AIR FARES HIGH.
THE INDUSTRY IS DENYING THE
CLAIMS BUT YESTERDAY AMERICAN,
UNITED, DELTA AND SOUTHWEST ALL
CONFIRMED THEY WERE COOPERATING
WITH THE PROBE.W TALKS WITH
A LAWMAKER WHO'S BEEN PUSHING
FOR THE INVESTIGATION.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST MONTH,
SENATOR RICHARD BLUMENTHAL
CALLED ON THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
TO LOOK INTO THESE ISSUES.
AND HE JOINS ME NOW FROM
HARTFORD.
SENATOR, WHAT MADE YOU WANT TO
ASK THE D.O.J. TO INVESTIGATE?
>> WHAT MADE ME ASK FOR THIS
INVESTIGATION IS THE EVIDENCE,
AND IT'S THE SAME EVIDENCE THAT
CAUSED THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
TO MAKE THE DECISION TO
INVESTIGATE.
BY THE WAY, THE DEPARTMENT OF
ANTI-TRUST INVESTIGATIONS OUT OF
CURIOSITY OR WHIM.
THERE HAS TO BE SOME FACTUAL
INDICATION.
AND HERE IT WAS, PRICING
PATTERN, WARNINGS TO POTENTIAL
COMPETITORS LIKE SOUTHWE
AIRLINES THAT IT HAD TO CONTINUE
KEEPING CAPACITY OR NUMBERS OF
FLIGHTS DOWN, AND THE FACT THAT
THERE HAVE BEEN INCREASING
PRICES FOR CONSUMERS AS WELL AS
REDUCED NUMBERS OF SEATS ON
CERTAIN ROUTES.
>> SO YOU'RE NOT TRYING TO
SPECIFICALLY CONSTRAIN WHAT A
COMPANY SHOULD PROFIT FROM OR
WHAT WOULD THE PERCENTAGE AT THE
END OF THE YEAR SHOULD BE.
YOUR TARGET IS SPECIFICALLY
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN
EXECUTIVES, RIGHT?
>> THE NATURE OF AN ANTI-TRUST
VIOLATION WHEN COLLUSION IS
ALLEGED, AND THAT'S THE SUBJECT
HERE, IS COORDINATION,
COOPERATION, THAT IS ILLEGAL
BECAUSE IT TENDS TO STIFLE
COMPETITION.
AND THE REASON COMPETITION IS
GOOD FOR CONSUMERS IS IT TENDS
TO LOWER PRICES AND PROVIDE MORE
CHOICES.
SO ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
THE TARGET HERE IS NOT THE
INDUSTRY'S PROFIT, WHICH ARE AT
AN ALL-TIME HIGH.
NOT NECESSARILY EVEN PRICES,
WHICH SHOULD BE REDUCED, BUT THE
COLLUSION THAT MAY RESULT IN
THOSE INCREASED PRICES.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ONE OF THE
CONCERNS IS ABOUT CON STRANGE
CAPACITY, THE NUMBER OF SEATS,
THE NUMBER OF SLIGHTS THAT ARE
ACTUALLY AVAILABLE THE ASSUMERS.
YOU DECREASE THAT SUPPLY, THE
DEMAND STAYS THE SAME, THE PRICE
GOES UP, RIGHT?
BUT THE INDUSTRY COMES BACK AND
SAYS CAPACITY IS ACTUALLY AT A
POST-RECESSION HIGH, THAT WE
HAVE MORE SEATS UP IN THE AIR
AND AVAILABLE TO PEOPLE NOW AND
THAT PRICES ARE COMING DOWN IN
2015.
>> THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS
THAT AIR FARES ARE AT AN
ALL-TIME HIGH.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE PATTERN OVER
THE LAST 20 YEARS, WHICH IS THE
TIME THEY'VE BEEN MEASURING
THEM, THE FLIGHTS LAST YEAR,
AVERAGE PRICE, $391, IS HIGHER
THAN AT ANY TIME OVER THOSE 20
YEARS.
IF YOU LOOK AT JUST FARES,
THEY'RE AT A 12-YEAR HIGH.
AND THEN ADD THE ADDITIONAL
CHARGES FOR BAGGAGE AND
RESERVATIONS AND ACCESS TO
INTERNET SITES, AND, IN FACT,
THE TOTAL COST RISES EVEN HIGHER
SOME CONSUMERS ARE SUFFERING
FROM HIGHER FARE PRICES, HIGHER
COSTS, AND THE NUMBERS OF SEATS
AVAILABLE TO THEM HAVE BEEN
CONSTRAINED POSSIBLY, ALLEGEDLY,
BY THIS COMMUNICATION
COORDINATION AMONG THE AIRLINES.
HOW DO THEY COMMUNICATE?
WELL, ONE EXAMPLE AT A RECENT
CONFERENCE, ALL OF THE INDUSTRY
EXECUTIVES WERE TALKING ABOUT
CAPACITY DISCIPLINE.
IF DISCIPLINE IS A CODEWORD OR
JARGON FOR WHAT THE OBJECTIVE IS
AND IF THEY ARE PUNISHING THE
AIRLINES LIKE SOUTHWEST THAT
HAVE THE NERVE TO VIOLATE THAT
REGIMENT, THEN THERE IS
POTENTIALLY A VIOLATION OF
ANTI-TRUST LAWS.
AND THE REMEDIES HERE DON'T
INVOLVE BREAKING UP AIRLINES.
THEY INVOLVE POSSIBLY MONEY BACK
TO CONSUMERS, PENALTIES FOR
THOSE COMPANIES, AND ALSO COURT
ORDERERS THAT PREVENT THIS KIND
OF MISCONDUCT IN THE FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: IS AN AIRLINE
WILL COME BACK AND SAY, LISTEN,
WE DECIDED TO TAKE SOME
AIRPLANES OUT OF THE SKY WHEN
THERE WERE HAVER AND FEWER
PEOPLE FLYING DURING THE
RECESSION.
NOW THAT IT'S OVER WE'RE
STARTING TO ADD SEATS AGAIN.
>> AND THERE'S NOTHING WRONG
WITH THOSE BUSINESS DECISIONS,
AS LONG AS THEY ARE MADE
INDEPENDENTLY AND COMPETITIVELY.
WHEN THOSE DECISIONS RESULT FROM
COORDINATED CONDUCT THAT IN
EFFECT VIOLATES THE PRINCIPLEBE
FREE AND OPEN COMPETITION AND
THE PRINCIPLES OF LAW,
ANTI-TRUST STATUTES THAT THERE
SHOULD BE NO COLLUSION, THEN
THERE IS A VIOLATION OF LAW.
AND VIOLATIONS OF LAW HAVE YET
TO BE PROVEN.
ALL THESE ARGUMENTS MADE BY THE
AIRLINES ARE ENTITLED TO BE MADE
TO THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT.
SENATOR RICHARD BLUMENTHAL,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR YOU TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: THE LATEST JOBS
REPORT BROUGHT SOME SIGHS OF
RELIEF.
THE OVERALL NUMBER OF NEW JOBS
SHOWED THE ECONOMY IS NOT
STARTING TO SPUTTER AS SOME HAD
FEARED EARLIER THIS YEAR.
BUT OTHER PATTERNS IN THE LABOR
MARKET ARE A SOURCE OF REAL
TROUBLE FOR MANY WORKERS, AND
FOR THOSE WHO BEEN LOOKING FOR A
JOB FOR A LONG TIME.
WAGES ARE FLAT, AND THE LABOR
PARTICIPATION RATE IS AT A
HISTORIC LOW.
WE'RE JOINED BY HARRY HOLZER, A
PROFESSOR OF PUBLIC POLICY AT
THE GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY PUBLIC
POLICY INSTITUTE AND FORMER
CHIEF ECONOMIST FOR THE
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.
WE WELCOME YOU BACK TO THE
PROGRAM.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
GOOD TO BE HERE.
>> Woodruff: LET'S START WITH
THE GOOD NEWS.
IT LOOKS LIKE HEALTHY GROWTH IN
JOBS.
>> THE NUMBER 223,000 NEW
PAYROLL JOBS IS ABOUT WHAT
PEOPLE EXPECTED, MAYBE SLIGHTLY
LOWER.
BUT IT'S IN LINE WITH WHAT WE'VE
SEEN RECENTLY.
IT'S CONSISTENT WITH THAT KIND
OF SLOW BUT STEADY TIGHTENING OF
THE LABOR MARKET.
>> AND THIS IS ACROSS DIFFERENT
WAGE LEVELS, WAGE GROUP, IS THAT
RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
MOST INDUSTRIES AT LEAST ON THE
SERVICE SIDE OF THE ECONOMY
SHOWED SOME HEALTHY JOB GROWTH
THIS PAST MONTH.
WE DIDN'T SEE IT IN
MANUFACTURING.
CONSTRUCTION.
BUT MANY OTHER SECTORS,
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES IN THE
HIGH END, RESTAURANTS AND RETAIL
IN THE LOW END, HEALTH CARE,
JOBS IN THE MIDDLE ALL SHOWED
NICE JOB GROWTH.
>> Woodruff: EARLIER THIS YEAR
THERE WAS WORRY THINGS MIGHT BE
SLOWING DOWN, SO THIS TELLS US
THINGS ARE ON A MORE SOLID
FOOTING.
>> WE HAD ONE DISAPPOINTING
MONTH BACK IN MARCH, BUT THE
LAST THREE MONTHS NOW, THE
ENTIRE SECOND QUARTER, SHOW
PRETTY SOLID JOB GROWTH.
SO THOSE ARE EARLIER WORRIES ARE
NO LONGER BOTHERING US ANYMORE.
>> THIS IS A MONTH, HOWEVER,
WHEN THE WAGES WERE STAGNANT.
WHAT DOES THAT TELL US?
>> WELL, THE WAGE NUMBERS HAVE
BEEN BOUNCING AROUND.
LAST MONTH WE HAD A GOOD MONTH
FOR WAGES.
THIS MONTH THEY WERE TOTALLY
FLAT.
WHAT THAT IS SAYING IS THAT EVEN
WITH THE TIGHTENING THAT'S
OCCURRED, THE JOB MARKET STILL
ISN'T TIGHT ENOUGH AND THERE'S
STILL NOT ENOUGH PRESSURE ON
EMPLOYERS FOR CONSISTENT WAGE
PRESSURE.
IF YOU AVERAGE OUT ALL THESE
DIFFERENT MONTHS, YOU'RE GETTING
WAGE GROWTH ABOUT 2%.
THAT'S JUST SLIGHTLY AHEAD OF
INFLATION.
THAT'S NOWHERE NEAR WHAT WE'D
LIKE TO SEE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT I REALLY
THIS WANT TO FOCUS ON, YES, THE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE WAS DOWN, BUT
WHAT THEY CALL THE LABOR FORCE
PARTICIPATION RATE AT ITS LOWEST
LEVEL IN 38 YEARS.
WHAT'S HAPPENING HERE?
>> WELL, A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN DROPPING OUT OF THE LABOR
FORCE.
NOW, TO BE IN THE LABOR FORCE,
YOU HAVE TO DO SOMETHING TO LOOK
FOR A NEW JOB IN THE PREVIOUS
MONTH.
AND A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE STOPPED
DOING THAT.
AND THAT RATE HAS BEEN DECLINING
NOW SINCE THE GREAT RECESSION
STARTED.
WE KNEW SOME OF THAT WAS GOING
TO HAPPEN.
WE KNEW THE BABY BOOMERS WERE
REACHING RETIREMENT YEARS AND
THEY WERE GOING TO START
LEAVING.
AND THAT ACCOUNTS FOR ABOUT HALF
OF THE OVERALL DROP WE'VE SEEN
IN THE LAST EIGHT YEARS OR SO.
WHAT'S MORE WORRISOME, WHAT'S
BEEN MORE SURPRISING IS THAT
EVEN PEOPLE SAY BELOW THE AGE OF
55, WHAT WE CALL PRIME AGE
WORKERS, HAVE ALSO BEEN LEAVING
THE LABOR FORCE, AND WE DON'T
SEE ANY SIGNS THAT IN GREAT
NUMBERS THEY'RE COMING BACK.
THAT'S A PROBLEM FOR THEM IN
TERMS OF THEIR OWN EARNING
CAPACITY, BUT ALSO FOR THE
COUNTRY, AS WELL.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ARE THE
EXPLANATIONS?
>> THERE ARE DIFFERENT
EXPLANATIONS.
SOME PEOPLE MAYBE LOOK AT THE
WAGES THEY'RE GOING TO GET AND
DECIDE IT'S NOT GOOD ENOUGH.
SOME PEOPLE HAVE BEEN OUT OF
WORK FOR A LONG TIME, AND THEY
GET DISCOURAGED.
THEY KNOW THEIR SKILLS GET
RUSTY, THEIR CONTACTS GET ARE
RUSTY.
THEY DON'T THINK EMPLOYERS ARE
GOING THE HIRE THEM SO THEY
DRIFT AWAY.
SOME PEOPLE START DOING OTHER
THINGS.
MAYBE THEY START WORKING OFF THE
BOOKS.
MAYBE THEY GO ON DISABILITY.
MAYBE THEY BECOME THE
STAY-AT-HOME PARENT.
ONCE YOU START DOING SOMETHING
ELSE, IT'S A LOT HARDER TO TURN
AROUND AND COME BACK INTO THE
LABOR MARKET.
IT REMAINS A COMPETITIVE MARKET.
>> Woodruff: IS THERE A GOOD
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT HAPPENS?
BECAUSE I KNOW FOR A LONG TIME
WE WERE TALKING ABOUT THE
LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYED, PEOPLE WHO
KEPT LOOKING AND KEPT LOOKING.
THEY WEREN'T FINDING WORK.
NOW WE'RE TALKING ABOUT PEOPLE
WHO HAVE JUST GIVEN UP.
IS THERE... DO WE UNDERSTAND
WHAT HAPPENS IN BETWEEN.
NOT COMPLETELY.
WE DO HAVE SOME SENSE THAT ONCE
YOU'RE IN THE CATEGORY OF BEING
LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYED.
IT'S HARDER TO GET BACK.
SOME PEOPLE DO COME BACK INCH
SOME PEOPLE DO GET A JOB AFTER
BEING OUT A YEAR, TWO YEARS,
THREE YEARS.
BUT SOME PEOPLE DON'T.
THE LONGER THEY'RE OUT, THE LESS
SOLID THEIR PROSPECTS ARE WHEN
THEY COME BACK.
A LOT OF THEM JUST DECIDE TO DO
SOMETHING ELSE AND DRIFT AWAY.
>> DOES HISTORY TELL US, AS YOU
SAY, THAT THESE PEOPLE, ONCE
THEY'RE OUT, THEY STAY OUT?
>> IT'S NOT NECESSARILY
PERMANENT, YOU CAN IMAGINE A
REALLY STRONG LABOR MARKET OF
THE KIND THAT WE HAD AT THE END
OF THE 1990s.
IT MIGHT DRAW SOME PEOPLE BACK
IN, BUT ABSENT THAT, IT WILL BE
HARDER AND HARDER FOR THESE
PEOPLE.
THEY'LL GET MORE SETTLED IN
WHATEVER OTHER ROLES THEY'RE IN
RIGHT NOW.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT GETS
BAKED INTO THE OVERALL
EMPLOYMENT PICTURE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT'S BAD FOR THE COUNTRY BECAUSE
WE'RE LOSING PRODUCTIVE
CAPACITY.
WE SIMPLY CAN'T AFFORD TO HAVE
SEVERAL MILLION PEOPLE STOP
WORKING AND STOP LOOKING FOR
WORK.
>> Woodruff: HARRY HOLZER WITH
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY, THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: IN THE DAYS SINCE
THE SUPREME COURT MADE GAY
MARRIAGE LEGAL AROUND THE
NATION, OUR CORRESPONDENT PAUL
SOLMAN HAS BEEN LOOKING AT THE
LIKELY FINANCIAL BOOST FOR THE
WEDDING INDUSTRY AND THE BROADER
ECONOMY.
HE WENT TO OHIO, ONE OF THE FOUR
STATES AT THE CENTER OF THE CASE
BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT.
IT'S PART OF OUR WEEKLY SEGMENT,
"MAKING SENSE," WHICH AIRS EVERY
THURSDAY ON THE NEWSHOUR.
>> Reporter: FROM HER HOME BASE
IN COLUMBUS, OHIO, JAN KISH
HELPS CATER WEDDINGS, WORLDWIDE.
AND YOU'RE GOING TO SLICE OFF...
>> I'M GOING TO CUT OFF THE TOP
OF THE BOTTLE.
>> Reporter: AND THIS IS IN
ADDITION TO THE CAKE THAT YOU
PROVIDE?
>> IT IS IN ADDITION AND THEN
THE BRIDE AND GROOM CAN USE THIS
FABULOUS SABER TO CUT THEIR CAKE
WITH.
>> Reporter: OKAY, SO GO AHEAD.
>> Reporter: KISH DOESN'T JUST
POP THE CORK...
KISH DISPATCHES IT, DECAPTITATES
IT.
AND SHE HAS LONG BEEN BEEN
RECEPTIVE TO OTHER INNOVATIONS
IN THE WEDDING INDUSTRY,
ASSISTING EARLY ON IN GAY
MARRIAGES.
BUT THIS ISN'T A PARTICULAR GAY
WEDDING THING, GAY MARRIAGE?
>> NO, IT IS A CELEBRATION THING
BUT I HAVE A GAY FRIEND WHO IS
GETTING MARRIED AND HE WOULD
LIKE TO HAVE FIVE BARE-CHESTEDPG
FIVE BOTTLES OF CHAMPAGNE ALL AT
THE SAME TIME.
>> Reporter: IS IT GOING TO
HAPPEN?
>> IT IS.
YOU BETCHA.
>> Reporter: RATED ONE OF THE
COUNTRY'S TOP 10 CAKE BAKERS,
JAN KISH IS PART OF A NEW GROUP
OF LOCAL WEDDING SPECIALISTS
CALLED PRIDE PERFECT, FOUNDED BY
A LOCAL PHOTOGRAPHER, TO BRING
TOGETHER TOP TALENT FRIENDLY TO
THE LGBT COMMUNITY.
AND KISH'S WEDDING CAKES?
THE SKY'S THE LIMIT, FROM VAN
GOGH'S STARRY NIGHT TO A
CHOCOLATE MOOSE TO A STEAM PUNK
CONCOCTION GILDED WITH SILVER
AND GOLD LEAF.
WHICH SHOULD I TRY FIRST?
>> THIS IS A FAVORITE CHOCOLATE
CAKE WITH A MOCHA BUTTERCREAM.
>> Reporter: ALRIGHT LET'S TRY
THAT.
THIS IS A PARTICULARLY ENJOYABLE
WAY TO SHOOT A STORY.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER MEMBER OF
PRIDE PERFECT WEDDINGS THE GOWN
SHOP OF THE COLUMBUS GAY
MARRIAGE CONSORTIUM: GOWN-MONGER
LINDSAY FORK, SIMILARLY OFF-
BEAT.
SUITS FOR LESBIAN BRIDES, FOR
EXAMPLE, WHO MIGHT OR MIGHT NOT
WANT TO FLAUNT THEIR FEMININITY.
>> THIS IS A VERY SCANDALOUS
TOP.
IT CAN BE UNDERNEATH THE JACKET
OR BY ITSELF.
>> Reporter: CINDERELLA POUFS;
CROWNS OF JEWELS, FORK'S
INVENTORY RUNS THE GAMUT FROM
TRADITIONAL TO CUTTING EDGE.
HOW DO YOU HANDLE THE SITUATION
OF TWO BRIDES WHEN THEY DON'T
WANT THE SAME WEDDING DRESS?
>> IT'S QUITE FUNNY ACTUALLY, A
LOT OF TIMES THEY DON'T WANT TO
SEE EACH OTHER BECAUSE THEY WANT
IT TO BE A SURPRISE AS ANY MAN
AND OR WOMAN WOULD NOT WANT TO
SEE EACH OTHER BEFORE THE
CEREMONY.
SO WE WOULD TAKE THEM INTO
DIFFERENT DRESSING ROOMS WITH
DIFFERENT STYLISTS AND HAVE THEM
GO THROUGH THE ENTIRE PROCESS AS
THOUGH THEY WERE JUST THERE
ALONE.
>> Reporter: SO THE GAY MARRIAGE
DECISION IS GOOD FOR THE GOWN-
MONGER, GOOD FOR THE BAKER, GOOD
FOR OHIO, SAYS FLORIST MARY
ERNST, AS LOCAL COUPLES NOW STAY
PUT.
>> THEY DON'T HAVE TO GO OUT OF
STATE AND MARRY.
A LOT OF OUR CUSTOMERS WERE
GOING TO NEW YORK OR
MASSACHUSETTS TO GET MARRIED SO
NOW THEY CAN DO IT HERE.
>> Reporter: BUT OF COURSE EVEN
THE SWEETEST ROSE HAS ITS
THORNS.
JAN KISH HAS BRANDISHED THE
RAINBOW FLAG ON HER WEBSITE
SINCE SHE LAUNCHED IT YEARS AGO.
BUT A RECENT HIRE APPARENTLY
DIDN'T REALIZE THE BUSINESS WAS
SEXUAL ORIENTATION BLIND UNTIL
THIS WEEKEND.
>> BECAUSE OF HER RELIGIOUS
BELIEFS, SHE HAS DECIDED TO STEP
BACK FROM LA PETITE FLEUR.
>> Reporter: SHE QUIT?
BECAUSE YOU SERVE GAY CUSTOMERS?
>> BECAUSE WE SUPPORT THE GAY
COMMUNITY SHE FEELS THAT SHE
DOES NOT WANT TO BE PART OF THAT
BECAUSE OF HER RELIGIOUS
BACKGROUND.
AND THAT'S FINE, YOU KNOW THAT'S
HER MORAL STANCE AND SHE HAS A
RIGHT TO THAT.
>> Reporter: YOU DIDN'T TRY TO
TALK HER OUT OF IT?
>> I ASKED HER FOR TWO WEEKS
NOTICE.
>> Reporter: EVEN IN GAY-
FRIENDLY COLUMBUS, OHIO, THEN,
RELIGIOUS PREJUDICE CAN STILL
TRUMP ECONOMIC SELF-INTEREST.
BUT THERE ARE ECONOMIC BENEFITS
APLENTY IN LEGALIZING GAY
MARRIAGE, AND NOT JUST IN OHIO.
>> WE HAVE A WEDDING INDUSTRY
THAT'S ABOUT TO BOOM BECAUSE NOW
YOU CAN GET MARRIED IN ALL 50
STATES.
SO THERE'LL BE WEDDINGS,
THERE'LL BE HONEYMOONS, THERE'LL
BE PLANNING.
>> Reporter: THERE WILL ALSO BE
PLENTY OF NEW BUSINESS FOR THE
LIKES OF JANIS COWHEY, AN
ACCOUNTANT AND LAWYER.
>> WE'VE GOT ACCOUNTANTS WHO
NEED TO DO TAX RETURNS, MAYBE
AMENDED TAX RETURNS, MAYBE
REVIEW PAST TAX RETURNS, AND
WE'VE GOT LAWYERS WHO NEED TO
REVIEW ESTATE PLANNING
DOCUMENTS, YOU KNOW WHAT DO YOU
NEED TO DO GOING FORWARD, WHAT
DO YOU HAVE IN PLACE UNTIL NOW,
SO THERE'S A LOT THAT'S GOING TO
CHANGE.
>> Reporter: AND OF COURSE,
THERE WILL BE MORE DIVORCES.
BUT LOCALLY, SAYS COLUMBUS' BILL
LAFAYETTE, WHO RUNS THE OHIO
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT FIRM,
REGIONOMICS.
>> BY FAR THE BIGGEST IMPACT IS
GOING TO BE ON THE WORKFORCE.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE OF PEOPLE
WHO WILL NOW STAY IN OHIO AS
OPPOSED TO MOVING OUT OF STATE,
ESPECIALLY THOSE MOST LIKELY TO
BE ECONOMIC INNOVATORS.
>> CREATIVE PEOPLE LIKE OPEN AND
ACCEPTING SPACES BECAUSE THEY
WANT TO KNOW THAT DESPITE THE
FACT THAT THEY MAY THINK
DIFFERENTLY FROM THE TYPICAL
PERSON THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE
LAUGHED AT.
SO GAYS AND LESBIANS ARE REALLY
THE CANARY IN THE COAL MINE.
>> Reporter: AS IT HAPPENS,
LAFAYETTE HIMSELF IS ABOUT TO
TIE THE GAY KNOT.
HE AND RON TEMPLIN HAVE BEEN
TOGETHER 12 YEARS, HAD A
COMMITMENT CEREMONY IN CHURCH IN
2003.
BUT THEY WEREN'T LEGALLY ABLE TO
BE WED IN OHIO AND CONSIDERED
MOVING TO MASSACHUSETTS, UNTIL
LAST WEEK.
>> I WAS AT WORK, THE PEOPLE HAD
GATHERED AROUND MY DESK FOR THE
DECISION, AND THE MINUTE THE
DECISION HAPPENED, I OF COURSE
BROKE DOWN IN TEARS AND SOME
OTHER OF MY TEAMMATES DID AS
WELL.
>> Reporter: WERE THEY GAY?
>> NO, THEY WERE STRAIGHT BUT
VERY SUPPORTIVE.
>> Reporter: SO THEY CRIED AS
WELL.
>> YES AND THEY CONGRATULATED
ME.
THEY CONGRATULATED ME AND I
IMMEDIATELY I.M.'D MY SUPERVISOR
"MAY I LEAVE AND GET MY MARRIAGE
LICENSE" AND SHE SAID "OF
COURSE, GO," SO I WAS THE FIRST
ONE IN MY CAR AND WE WERE AT THE
COURT HOUSE AT 11:00 A.M.
GETTING OUR MARRIAGE LICENSE.
>> I DIDN'T CRY, I WAS JUST
NUMB, AND THIS I.M. CAME IN FROM
RON SAYING "I'M COMING HOME,
WE'RE GOING TO GET OUR MARRIAGE
LICENSE," AND I WAS "YES, YES,
YES."
>> Reporter: WHICH IS WHAT THE
MAJORITY OF THE SUPREME COURT
SAID, THOUGH RATHER MORE
SEDATELY, ON FRIDAY.
THIS IS ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN, REPORTING FOR THE
PBS NEWSHOUR FROM COLUMBUS,
OHIO.
>> Woodruff: TONIGHT THE
NEWSHOUR BEGINS A SERIES ON THE
WAY COMMUNITIES PREPARE AND
SURVIVE DISASTERS, BOTH NATURAL
AND MAN-MADE.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JACKIE JUDD BRINGS US A TALE OF
TWO CITIES, BOTH ON THE ATLANTIC
SEABOARD.
>> Reporter: THE CRANE TOWERING
OVER ROCKAWAY BEACH IS A SYMBOL
OF NEW YORK CITY'S URGENT,
ALMOST FRANTIC, EFFORT TO
PREVENT A REPEAT OF WHAT
HAPPENED IN 2012, WHEN HURRICANE
SANDY NEARLY BROUGHT THE CITY TO
ITS KNEES.
>> WE HAVE 520 MILES OF
SHORELINE.
WE'VE ALWAYS BEEN AT RISK OF
COASTAL INUNDATION, BUT SANDY
REALLY CHANGED THE WAY WE THINK
ABOUT THAT RISK AND HOW WE
ENGAGE WITH THE WATERFRONT.
>> Reporter: THE RESPONSE IS NOT
SIMPLY ABOUT MINIMIZING
HURRICANE DAMAGE.
THE LARGER ISSUE-- THE ISSUE
MAKING HURRICANES MORE
DESTRUCTIVE-- IS SEA LEVEL RISE
CAUSED BY CLIMATE CHANGE AND A
WARMING PLANET.
>> WE'RE NOT LABELING THINGS
WITH SEA LEVEL RISE WHEN WE
SHOULD BE.
SO, A STORM COMES IN, WE HAVE A
DAMAGING FLOOD, AND WE SAY WE
HAD A STORM, WE HAD A FLOOD, BUT
EVERY FLOOD IS DEEPER, BIGGER,
AND MORE DAMAGING BECAUSE OF THE
SEA LEVEL RISE WE'VE ALREADY
HAD.
>> Reporter: IN THE LAST CENTURY
THE SEA ROSE BY EIGHT INCHES,
AND THE RATE HAS BEEN
ACCELERATING SINCE THE 1990'S.
IN THE ROCKAWAYS, MAYOR BILL DE
BLASIO, WITH GREAT FANFARE,
OPENED THE FIRST STRETCH OF A
NEW, CONCRETE BOARDWALK, BUILT
ABOVE THE FLOOD PLAIN, TO
REPLACE THE WOODEN ONE SANDY
DESTROYED.
>> THIS IS ALSO PART OF
RESILIENCY BECAUSE ALL OF THESE
MEASURES WILL PROTECT NOT JUST
THE BOARDWALK, BUT PROTECT THE
COMMUNITY BEYOND THE BOARDWALK.
>> Reporter: THE BOARDWALK, SO
CLOSE TO HOMES AND BUSINESSES
DAMAGED BY SANDY, IS DESIGNED TO
HOLD BACK STORM SURGE.
IT IS ONLY A PIECE OF A
$20 BILLION BLUEPRINT RESULTING
FROM A COLLABORATION WITH THE
STATE AND FEDERAL GOVERNMTSEN
AND CLIMATE CHANGE SCIENTISTS.
DAN ZARRELLI, WHO LEADS THE
CITY'S EFFORTS, SAYS FIRST CAME
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE CITY'S
RISKS ANVULND ERABILITIES.
AND FROM THAT, THE MORE GRANULAR
QUESTIONS, DEALING WITH
HARDENING OLD INFRASTRUCTURE AND
BUILDING NEW INFRASTRUCTURE TO
MAKE IT WITHSTAND A STORM SURGE.
>> ABOUT 80% OF THE SHORELINE
COULD BE FLOODED ON A DAILY
BASIS, JUST DUE TO HIGH TIDE,
NOT EVEN A STORM EVENT.
SO THINKING THROUGH THE
IMPLICATIONS ON NEIGHBORHOODS,
THE INVESTMENTS WE NEED THE MAKE
TO REDUCE RISK AND TO HANDLE
THAT LEVEL OF INUNDATION IS
SOMETHING THAT'S DRIVING OUR
POLICIES AROUND OUR ENTIRE
COASTAL PROTECTION PLAN.
>> Reporter: NEW YORK CITY'S
AGGRESSIVE EFFORTS TO PREVENT
FUTURE CATASTROPHE IS NOT THE
APPROACH ALL CITIES IN DANGER OF
RISING SEA LEVELS AND OTHER
CONSEQUENCES OF CLIMATE CHANGE-
ARE FOLLOWING.
TAKE CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA
WHICH IS CALLED LOW COUNTRY FOR
A REASON.
THIS SPOT NEAR THE CENTER OF THE
CITY IS JUST SEVERAL FEET ABOVE
SEA LEVEL.
SANDY BRIDGES OWNS A SMALL
BOUTIQUE NEARBY, CHAINRLESTON'S
VIBRANT TOURIST DISTRICT.
>> HIGH TIDE, RAINY DAY, WE JUST
ALWAYS EXPERIENCED FLOODING
HERE.
>> Reporter: GUARANTEED?
>> IT COMES RIGHT UP TO MY
DOORSTEP ON A REALLY HEAVY
DOWNPOUR.
>> Reporter: THIS IS WHAT IT
LOOKED LIKE NEAR HER STORE IN
2012 AFTER HURRICANE ISAAC
BRUSHED BY THE CITY.
THE METROPOLITAN AREA OF 700,000
PEOPLE, AND GROWING FAST, IS ONE
OF THE MOST VULNERABLE ALONG THE
EAST COAST.
CHARLESTON IS NOT ONLY LOW-
LYING, WATERWAYS SNAKE THROUGH
THE CITY AND NEIGHBORHOODS HAVE
BEEN BUILT ON LANDFILL.
FLOODING HAS PLAGUED THE CITY
FOR GENERATIONS, BUT IT'S
GETTING WORSE.
>> AT A PARTICULARLY HIGH TIDE,
FLOOD WATER ALREADY COMES IN
THROUGH THE SEA WALL AND THROUGH
THE SIDEWALK AND IT FILLS THE
STREET RIGHT HERE IN THIS
INTERSECTION.
>> Reporter: SOMETIMES AN
UNUSUALLY HIGH TIDE, WITHOUT ANY
RAIN AT ALL, WILL TRIGGER WHAT
LOCALS LIKE ENVIRONMENTALIST
CHRIS CARNEVALE CALL NUISANCE
FLOODING.
>> WE USED TO SEE ABOUT FOUR AND
A HALF DAYS OF NUISANCE FLOODING
PER YEAR IN THE MID-20th
CENTURY.
NOW, WE'RE UP TO ABOUT 23 DAYS
PER YEAR.
WHEN WE PROJECT THAT INTO THE
FUTURE AS SEAS CONTINUE TO RISE,
THAT'S GOING TO LOOK-- THAT'S
GOING TO BE MANY MORE DAYS PER
YEAR.
>> Reporter: EVEN SO, CRITICS
SAY THE CITY AND STATE RESPONSE
LACKS THE URGENCY NEW YORK HAS
BROUGHT TO THE ISSUE.
>> THEY ARE TAKING SOME EFFORT,
BUT THOSE EFFORTS ARE SIMPLY
VERY INADEQUATE.
FRANK KNAPP ORGANIZED SMALL
BUSINESS OWNERS TO AGITATE FOR A
SWIFTER ACTION AND THEY'VE
POSTED BLUE PATCHES ON DOOR
FRONTS TO REMIND TOURISTS OF THE
FLOOD LINE IN A STORM SURGE.
>> WHEN THE PUBLIC ACTUALLY
TAKES THE TIME TO LEARN ABOUT
THE INUNDATION THREATS UNDER
VERY SMALL LEVELS OF SEA LEVEL
RISE, ONE OR TWO FEET, I THINK
THEY'RE GOING TO BE VERY SHOCKED
AND THEY'RE GOING TO BE
DEMANDING THAT THE CITY START
DOING SOME PLANNING.
>> Reporter: IT'S BEEN MORE THAN
A QUARTER CENTURY SINCE
CHARLESTON HAD ITS SANDY:
HURRICANE HUGO IN '89.
SO THAT SENSE OF URGENCY IS
ABSENT.
AND IN A POLITICALLY
CONSERVATIVE STATE SUCH AS SOUTH
CAROLINA, JUST DISCUSSING
CLIMATE CHANGE IS OFTEN SPOKEN
ABOUT IN CODE.
>> Reporter: POLITICAL COLUMNIST
BRIAN HICKS SAYS IN 2011,
SCIENTISTS AT THE DEPARTMENT OF
NATURAL RESOURCES PRODUCED A
REPORT INTENDED TO SOUND THE
ALARM ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE
IMPACT, BUT POLICAL TIAPPOINTEES
SHELVED IT.
>> WHEN THEY DID FINALLY RELEASE
IT, THEY CHANGED THE EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY, AND THERE WERE ALL
THESE THINGS ABOUT SOME
SCIENTISTS THINK THIS, AND SOME
SCIENTISTS THINK THAT.
IT WAS VERY MUCH A DENIAL FACTOR
HERE, AND THEY DEEP-SIXED IT.
>> Reporter: PREDICTIONS FOR SEA
LEVEL RISE IN THE NEXT 100 YEARS
RANGE FROM ONE FOOT TO FIVE
FEET.
IN CHARLESTON, THE CREEPING BLUE
IN THIS MAP SHOWS FLOODING THAT
WOULD OCCUR AT HIGH TIDE WITH
ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR AND FIVE
FEET.
THE HIGHER END WOULD WRECK
HAVOC.
LIZ FLY IS PART OF A TEAM OF
SCIENTISTS OVERSEEING COASTAL
CONSERVATION IN SOUTH CAROLINA.
>> THERE IS THE RISK AND
LIKELIHOOD OF SOME COMMUNITIES
GOING UNDER WATER WITH INCREASED
SEA LEVEL RISE.
>> CLIMATE CHANGE IS NOT GOING
TO REMOVE CHARLESTON FROM THE
LANDSCAPE.
>> Reporter: BUT, JOE RILEY,
MAYOR FOR A REMARKABLE 40 YEARS,
IS BULLISH ON CHARLESTON'S
ABILITY TO MAINTAIN THE CITY'S
CURRENT FOOTPRINT.
>> IT'S LOW-LYING AND SO IT'S
ALL INCREMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS
THAT WILL PROTECT THIS BEAUTIFUL
HISTORIC CITY.
>> Reporter: THE MAJOR
IMPROVEMENTS, TO DATE, ARE
FORTIFICATIONS TO THE BATTERY,
AT THE POINT OF THE CHARLESTON
PENINSULA.
AND THIS EXTENSIVE, NEW DRAINAGE
SYSTEM, DESIGNED TO PULL
FLOODWATER OUT OF THE CITY AS
FAST AS IT COMES IN.
BUT THERE IS NOT A GRAND PLAN IN
PLACE.
ARE YOU PLANNING ON A ONE-FOOT
RISE?
IS THAT THE WORKING ASSUMPTION?
>> WE'RE PLANNING ON A RANGE.
IT'S INCREMENTAL, AND EACH YEAR
OR DECADE YOU FURTHER CALIBRATE
THAT.
>> Reporter: WHAT IS THE RANGE?
>> WELL, THE RANGE-YOU'LL NEED
TO ASK OUR RESILIENCY PEOPLE,
BUT WE'RE-WE SEE SOME A FOOT,
SOME LESS THAN A FOOT, SOME MORE
THAN A FOOT.
>> Reporter: MAYOR RILEY LATER
CLARIFIED THAT HE WAS NOT
SUGGESTING ONE FOOT WAS ADEQUATE
FOR PLANNING AND DESCRIBED THE
DRAINAGE PROJECT AS A "SERIOUS
BEGINNING" TO CHARLESTON'S
PREPARATIONS.
STILL, THE ADMINISTRATION HAS
SIGNIFICANT CATCHING UP TO DO.
>> IT'S IMPORTANT FOR A
COMMUNITY TO LOOK AT THAT RANGE
OF SCENARIOS AND THINK ABOUT
THEIR RISK MANAGEMENT, AND THINK
ABOUT WHAT DECISIONS ARE HIGH
RISK, AND SO MAYBE YOU SHOULD
PLAN FOR A MORE EXTREME CASE OF
SEA LEVEL RISE, WHILE SOME OTHER
DECISIONS IT MIGHT BE OKAY TO
PLAN FOR.
>> Reporter: BUT THAT HAS NOT
BEEN DECIDED IN CHARLESTON,
RIGHT?
>> NO.
>> Reporter: NEW YORK CITY'S
ROBUST APPROACH IS MORE THE
EXCEPTION THAN THE RULE ALONG
THE EAST COAST, ESPECIALLY AMONG
SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZED CITIES
LIKE CHARLESTON.
>> THIS IS A HARD ISSUE TO
REALLY DIGEST AND TACKLE.
WE HAVE NO LEGAL PRECEDENT, WE
HAVE NO INSTITUTIONAL PRECEDENT
FOR THE IDEA THAT LAND WILL BE
DISAPPEARING.
AND WE'RE ULTIMATELY GOING TO
NEED TO TAKE A VERY DEEP LOOK AT
IT TO PRESERVE THE HERITAGE OF
OUR CITY-- OF OUR CITIES AND
>> 100 YEARS AGO THEY STARTED
PLANNING AND PRESERVING AND
CONSERVING CHARLESTON.
AND 100 YEARS FROM NOW I WANT
ANOTHER LITTLE LOCAL BUSINESS
OWNER TO BE ABLE TO STAND HERE
AND SAY THE SAME THING.
SO, THAT'S WHAT HONESTLY
CONCERNS ME IS THAT 100 YEARS
FROM NOW THIS COULD BE LOST.
>> Reporter: CHARLESTON MAYOR
RILEY COMPARES THE THREAT OF
RISING SEA TO AN ENEMY INVASION,
WHICH IS ST HJUOW NEW YORK CITY
IS BEHAVING AS IT BUILDS NEW
DEFENSES.
FOR BOTH CITIES, THERE IS NO
DOUBT THE ENEMY IS APPROACHING.
FOR THE NEWSHOUR, THIS IS JACKIE
JUDD IN CHARLESTON.
>> Woodruff: TONIGHT WE BEGIN A
TWO PART LOOK AT THE GRATEFUL
DEAD.
FIRST UP, WE FOCUS ON DRUMMER
MICKEY HART AND HIS EFFORT TO
REPLICATE THE SOUNDS OF THE
UNIVERSE ON HIS DRUMS....
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MIKE
CERRE TAKES US ON A TRIP TO
LEARN MORE.
>> THIS IS REALLY THE SOUNDS OF
THE UNIVERSE.
THIS IS WHAT THE COSMOS SOUNDS
LIKE.
PYTHAGORAS FOUNDED THE SECRETS
OF THE UNIVERSE, THE RHYTHM OF
THE UNIVERSE, THE MATHEMATICS
WITH JUST A LONG STRING WHICH
VIBRATED.
IF I HAD ANY GURU, IT WOULD HAVE
TO BE PYTHAGORAS, AND RHYTHM IS
E THGOD.
>> Reporter: IN THE PANTHEON OF
ROCK AND ROLL GODS, THE GRATEFUL
DEAD HAVE ALWAYS BEEN KNOWN FOR
THEIR SOMEWHAT COSMIC APPROACH
TO MUSIC.
AS ONE OF ITS FOUNDING
DRUMMERS, MICKEY HART HAS SPENT
THE BETTER PART OF HIS
PROFESSIONAL LIFE OUTSIDE OF THE
GRATEFUL DEAD.
EXPLORING THE CULTURAL AND
SCIENTIFIC BASIS OF "GOOD
VIBRATIONS."
>> THE UNIVERSE IS MADE OF
VIBRATIONS.
I HAVE BEEN VERY INTERESTED IN
SONIFYING THE UNIVERSE, THE
COSMOS, THE SUN, THE BIG BANG,
TAKING THOSE RADIATIONS FROM
TELESCOPES-- RADIO TELESCOPES
AND TURNING THAT RADIATION INTO
SOUND WHICH I MAKE MUSIC OUT OF
AND COMPOSE WITH, IN THE MACRO
AND NOW IN THE MICRO WITH THE
BRAIN WAVES, HEART RHYTHMS,
D.N.A., STEM CELLS.
ALL OF THESE HAVE A SOUND SO WE
TAKE THESE SOUNDS IN AND WE
EMBED THEM IN THE MUSIC.
>> Reporter: MICKEY'S SEARCH
FOR THE UNIVERSAL SOURCE OF
RHYTHM HAS GONE INTERGALACTIC
AND ALL THE WAY BACK TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE COSMOS.
>> YOU KNOW, THE MOMENT OF
CREATION, BEGINNING OF TIME AND
SPACE WHEN THE BLANK PAGE OF THE
UNIVERSE EXPLODED AND CREATED
THE STARS, THE PLANETS, BLACK
HOLES, PULSE OR SUPERNOVAS, THIS
WAS THE BEGINNING OF TIME DAN
SPACE, AND THEN US, AND THEN WE
ARE STILL NOW TOYING WITH THIS
RHYTHMIC STIMULI THAT WAS
CREATED 13.7 BILLION YEARS AGO.
>> WHAT IS NEEDED IS SOMEONE WHO
IS ARTISTIC TO HEAR THESE SOUNDS
AND BE INSPIRED BY THEM AND TURN
THEM INTO SOMETHING PLEASING FOR
PEOPLE TO HEAR.
>> Reporter: ASTROPHYSICIST DR.
GEORGE SMOOT EARNED A NOBEL
PRIZE FOR HIS WORK IN CHARTING
THE ORIGINS OF WHAT MANY BELIEVE
TO BE THE BEGINNING OF CREATION,
WITH THE BIG BANG.
HE'S ALSO A LONGTIME DEADHEAD.
>> I SAY, LOOK AT THESE WAVE
FORM, JACK KEVORKIAN, AND LET'S
SEE WHAT THEY SOUND LIKE AND
LET'S DANCE TO THOSE THINGS.
LET'S SEE WHAT THEY SOUND LIKE,
AND LET'S SEE.
LET'S DANCE TO THOSE THINGS AND
LET'S-- AND GEORGE SAID, YEAH.
>> Reporter: WITH THE HELP OF
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT
BERKELEY'S SUPERCOMPUTER, DR.
TMOOT'S TEAM CONVERTED LIGH
WAVE TRACES FROM THE BIG BANG
INTO SOUND WAVES FOR MICKEY TO
WORK WITH.
>> IT'S VERY DENSE, THERE'S A
LOT OF COLLISIONS UP THERE, AND
THERE'S A LOT OF BUMPS AND
GRINDS AND PULSES AND STUFF, AND
NOISE, WHICH YOU WOULDN'T CALL
MUSIC, BUT I TAKE IT AND I MAKE
IT INTO WHAT WE WOULD CALL, THE
HUMAN EAR WOULD CALL MUSIC SO WE
CAN ENJOY IT.
>> Reporter: THE GOLDEN GATE
BRIDGE WAS ONE OF MICKEY'S FIRST
LABORATORIES FOR HIS SCIENTIFIC
EXPERIMENTS.
HE AND THE GRATEFUL DEAD'S JERRY
GARCIA USED TO SNEAK ONTO THE
BRIDGE AT NIGHT WHEN IT WAS
CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC.
SOMETIMES WITH RUBBER MALLETS,
TO RECORD THE SOUNDS OF THE
BRIDGE'S VIBRATIONS TO INCLUDE
THEM IN GRATEFUL DEAD
PERFMANCORES IN THE '60'S AND
'70'S DURING THE BAS HENDYDAY.
YEAR'S LATER HE WORKED WITH THE
SAN FRANCISCO'S EXPLORATORIUM
AND THE NATIONA SCLIENCE
FOUNDATION ON CREATING THIS
REPLICA OF THE BRIDGE WITH
SENSORS TO MAKE IT AN INSTRUMENT
HE COULD ACTUALLY PLAY.
AND HE DID FOR GOLDEN GATE
BRIDGE'S 75TH ANNIVERSARY
CELEBRATION.
>> NOW I'D LIKE TO DO SOMETHING
WITH IT AS-IT IS AS IMPORTANT AS
PLAYING GRATEFUL DEAD MUSIC.
SEE THE THING ABOUT MUSIC IS
THAT YOU TAKE THE FEELING THAT
YOU GET FROM MUSIC AND YOU TAKE
IT OUT IN THE WORLD, YOU DO SOME
GOOD WITH IT.
IT CAN BE USED FOR OTHER THINGS
THAN DANCING, UH AND PLEASURE.
IT CAN BE USED AS MEDICINE.
WHEN I PLAYED A DRUM FOR MY
GRANDMOTHER WHO HAD
ALZHEIMER'S, SHE SPOKE MY NAME.
SHE HADN'T SPOKEN IN A YEAR.
THAT WAS POWER.
WHERE DID IT COME?
HOW DID THIS DO THAT.
>> Reporter: DR. ADAM GAZZALEY,
A RESEARCH NEUROLOGIST AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN
FRANCISCO IS WORKING WITH MICKEY
ON IDENTIFYING RHYTHMS THAT CAN
STIMULATE DIFFERENT PARTS OF
DISEASED AND DAMAGED BRAINS.
>> MICKEY'S WEARING AN E.E.G.
CAP AND EACH OF THESE ELECTRODES
ARE DETECTING THE SUBTLE SIGNALS
OF RHYTHMIC ACTIVITY BEING
GENERATED BY THE NEURONS IF HIS
BRAIN.
>> IT'S QUITE A NICE LOOKING
>> I LIKE IT.
>> SO THIS A LIVE RECORDING OF
MICKEY'S BRAIN.
>> THE ONLY WAY TO FIND THE CODE
ON HOW MUSIC WORKS IS THROUGH
SCIENCE AND THAT'S MY
RELATIONSHIP WITH ADAM GAZZALEY,
AND OTHER SCIENTISTS.
TO FIND HOW DOES IT WORK ON THE
BRAIN.
>> SO IF YOU CAN PRESCRIBE A
CERTAIN RHYTHMIC TREATMENT AND
ACTUALLY VALIDATE THAT THERE IS
AN OUTCOME THAT IS REPRODUCIBLE,
IT WOULD BE A VERY POWERFUL WAY
OF LOOKING AT MODERN MEDICINE.
>> AND IT SEEMS LIKE A VERY
NATURAL THING FROM MY RESEARCH
AND MEDICINE, THE SHAMAN USE
DRUMS IN ALL THEIR FORMS OF
HEALING.
SO IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
INVENTING, BUT WE'RE PROGRESSING
BECAUSE OF SCIENCE.
>> Reporter: A TEAM OF STEM CELL
RESEARCHERS AT THE GLADSTONE
INSTITUTE THEAT UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA, SAN FRANCISCO ARE
WORKING WITH MICKEY ON
IDENTIFYING IMPULSES GENERATED
BY BRAIN AND HEART CELLS.
BE ABLE TO WITH MICKEY HART'S
APPROACH CONVERT THAT ELECTRICAL
ENERGY INTO SOUND AND BE ABLE TO
MAP DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DISEASED
CELLS VERSUS NORMAL CELLS.
>> WE'LL KNOW WHAT RHYTHMS HAVE
BEEN CUT OR BROKEN AND BE ABLE
TO REPLACE THAT WITH A HEALTHIER
RHYTHM A HEALTHIER SOUND AND
FREQUENCY PERHAPS THAT WILL MAKE
THIS A THERAPY, A LEGITIMATE
SCIENCE.
>> Reporter: MICKEY HART IS
PULLING OUT ALL THE SCIENCE
STOPS AND DIGGING DEEP INTO HIS
RESEARCH OF THE ORIGINS OF
RHYTHM AND GOOD VIBRATIONS, TO
CREATE ONE OF THE BAND'S
SIGNATURE RHYTHM DEVILS
SEQUENCES WITH DRUMMER BILL
KREUTZMANN FOR THE GRATEFUL
DEAD'S FINAL PERFORMANCE
TOGETHER.
>> PYTHAGORAS IS THE OWNER OF
THIS.
HE'S THE GUY.
>> Reporter: AND WHAT ARE PEOPLE
GOING TO HEAR FOR THE 50TH
ANNIVERSARY THAT MAYBE NO ONE
HAS HEARD BEFORE.
>> OH THEY'RE GOING TO HEAR THE
LOWEST NOTE SOUNDED IN A CONCERT
WHICH IS 19 CYCLES.
>> Reporter: AND WILL YOU FEEL
THAT IN YOUR CHEST?
>> YOU'LL FEEL IT ALL OVER.
IT WILL VIBRATE YOUR WHOLE BODY.
IT WON'T SCARE YOU, IT WILL JUST
MAKE YOU FEEL REALLY GOOD, JUST
LIKE A BATH.
>> Reporter: FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THIS IS MIKE CERRE
REPORTING FROM SAN FRANCISCO.
>> Woodruff: WE WILL HAVE MORE
ON THE GRATEFUL DEAD AND THE
BAND'S FINAL CONCERT ON MONDAY.
>> Woodruff: TONIGHT WE CLOSE
WITH ANOTHER BRIEF BUT
SPECTACULAR, OUR SERIES OF
INTERVIEWS FEATURING INSIGHTS
FROM ARTISTS, AUTHORS, LEADERS
AND THINKERS, TELLING US ABOUT
THEIR PASSIONS.
TONIGHT PRODUCER STEVE GOLDBLOOM
SPEAKS BRIEFLY TO "ATLANTIC
MAGAZINE" NATIONAL CORRESPONDENT
TA-NEHISI COATES ABOUT THE ROLE
OFIC
>> I WAS BEEN DECEMBER 30, 1975
IN WEST BALTIMORE.
I GREW UP IN THE 1980S AND THE
EARLY '90s IN A VERY, VERY
VIOLENT TIME.
AND I LOVE JOURNALISM BECAUSE,
YOU KNOW, IT GIVES YOU A LICENSE
TO ANSWER, YOU KNOW, ALL THE
QUESTIONS THAT YOU HAVE, YOU
KNOW, IN THE BECOME OF YOUR
MIND.
PEOPLE PERCEIVE YOU AS AN
EXPERT, BUT, IN FACT, IF YOU'RE
DOING JOURNALISM RIGHT, YOU'RE
AN ACTUAL STUDENT.
WE WRITE ABOUT THE IMPACT OF
DIPLOMACY ON THIS COUNTRY.
THERE'S A GREAT DEAL OF ENERGY
SPENT ON MAKING SURE THAT PEOPLE
WHO ARE DIFFERENT THAN YOU
UNDERSTAND WHAT YOU'RE SAYING.
AND I THINK THAT ACTUALLY
CORRUPTS LANGUAGE BECAUSE YOU
END UP SOFTENING THINGS.
YOU END UP INSULTING PEOPLE'S
INTELLIGENCE.
I'M REALLY NOT THINKING ABOUT
HOW TO GET THE AVERAGE WHITE
READER TO SEE MY PERSPECTIVE.
I'M TRYING TO COMUN KATE AS
DIRECTLY AND FORCEFULLY AND
HONESTLY AS POSSIBLE.
ALL OF THESE CASES WE'RE SEEING
BLACK LIVES MATTER, THIS
MOVEMENT COME UP, THIS HAS BEEN
A GREAT DEAL OF FOCUS WHAT'S
CALLED POLICE REFORM, I BELIEVE
A MUCH, MUCH DEEPER PROBLEM, AND
THIS IS THAT WE ARE ASKING THE
POLICE TO DO CERTAIN THINGS THAT
MAYBE THEY SHOULDN'T DO.
TAKE OUT THAT HORRIBLE VIDEO SEE
WITH WALTER SCOTT IS SHOT IN THE
BACK BY AN OFFICER.
ONE OF THE REASONS WHY WALTER
SCOTT WAS RUNNING IS BECAUSE HE
HAD BEEN BROUGHT UP BEFORE ON
CHILD SUPPORT CASES, BUT WHAT
SHOULD WE BE DOING ABOUT CHILD
SUPPORT?
IS JAIL THE ANSWER?
SHOULD WE BE JAILING PEOPLE FOR
THIS?
FREDDIE GRAY IS ANOTHER CASE.
SAY YOU HAVE A SITUATION WHERE A
GENTLEMAN IS IN AN AREA THAT WE
DESIGNATE AS HIGH CRIME.
HE MAKES A MISTAKE OF MAKING EYE
CONTACT WITH THE POLICE OFFICER
AND THEN HE RETURNS.
THE REASON FREDDIE GRAY WAS
ARRESTED, HE MADE A DECISION,
WE'RE GOING TO PURSUE OUR DRUG
POLICY IN A CERTAIN WAY IN THAT
AREA.
WHY DID HE HAVE POLICE THERE IN
THE FIRST PLACE?
WHY DO WE HAVE A SITUATION IN
WHICH WE DECIDE THE POLICE
SHOULD BE ABLE TO ARREST PEOPLE
AND STOP AND SEARCH SOMEBODY
EFFECTIVELY BECAUSE THEY LOOK
SUSPICIOUS?
MENTAL HEALTH, MENTAL HEALTH IS
THE BIGGEST ONE.
WE HAVE A SITUATION IN WHICH IF
YOU HAVE ANY SORT OF MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUE IN THIS COUNTRY AND
YOU HAVE AN INTERACTION WITH A
POLICE OFFICER, YOU KNOW, YOU
MIGHT WELL END UP DEAD.
POLICE OFFICERS WALK AROUND WITH
GUNS.
DO WE WANT OUR MENTAL HEALTH
WORKERS WALKING AROUND WITH
GUNS.
THERE ARE OTHER WAYS WE CAN
THINK ABOUT DOING, THIS BUT WE
DECIDED NOT TO.
THE EXPECTATION THAT, YOU KNOW,
CATCHING THINGS ON TAPE IS GOING
TO SAVE US IS, YOU KNOW, I WOULD
SAY DEEPLY FLAWED.
EVEN SOMETIMES WHEN THINGS ARE
WRONG, LIKE ERIC GARNER'S
KILLING IN NEW YORK, THAT
DOESN'T MEAN ANYTHING IS GOING
TO HAPPEN.
YOU CAN'T BE AN AFRICAN AMERICAN
IN THIS COUNTRY AND SEE THE
WALTER SCOTT VIDEO AND BE
COMPLETELY AMAZED.
YOU DON'T HAVE THAT LUXURY OF
LIVING THAT WAY.
YOU'VE HAD INTERSECTIONS WITH
POLICE.
YOU KNOW PEOPLE WHO BAD THINGS
HAVE HAPPENED TO.
JUST BEING WHO THEY ARE.
MY NAME IS TA-NEHISI COATES,
THIS IS MY BRIEF BUT SPECTACULAR
TAKE ON THE LEGACY OF WHITE
SUPREMACY AND ITS CONTINUING
FUNCTION IN OUR SOCIETY TODAY.
>> Woodruff: GET A FIRST LOOK AT
OUR SERIES "BRIEF BUT
SPECTACULAR," EVERY THURSDAY ON
THE PBS NEWSHOUR PAGE ON
FACEBOOK.
AND SOME LATE-BREAKING NEWS
TONIGHT, WASHINGTON STATE HEALTH
OFFICIALS REPORT THE FIRST DEATH
FROM MEASLES IN THE UNITED
STATES IN 12 YEARS.
THE WOMAN WHOSE NAME HAS NOT
BEEN RELEASED WAS TAKING
MEDICATION THAT REDUCED HER
IMMUNE SYSTEM WHEN SHE WAS
APPARENTLY EXPOSED DURING AN
OUTBREAK LAST SPRING.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" ONLINE, THE
INTERNET IS IN A
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE: THE
INTERNET IS IN A TIZZY TODAY
AFTER A NEW YORK TIMES FOOD
COLUMNIST SUGGESTED WE ADD PEAS
TO OUR GUACAMOLE. NOT TO OUTDO
THE COLUMNIST, WE ASKED A
PHILADELPHIA RESTAURANT FOR SOME
IDEAS ON OTHER WAYS TO GARNISH
THE DISH, AND SO WE BRING YOU:
GUACAMOLE WITH CRAB AND MANGO.
FIND THAT RECIPE ON OUR HOME
PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS AT
pbs.org/newshour.
TONIGHT ON CHARLIE ROSE, A TOUR
OF RUSSIA'S HERMITAGE MUSEUM.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
JOIN US ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.